<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII: Public Approbation</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Public Approbation</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>If that child had no luck herself (except, of course, in meeting me), at any rate she never failed to bring me wondrous fortune. The air was smooth, and sweet, and soft, the sky had not a wrinkle, and the fickle sea was smiling, proud of pleasant manners. Directly I began to fish at the western tail of the Tuskar, scarcely a fish forebore me. Whiting-pollacks run in shoals, and a shoal I had of them; and the way I split and dried them made us long for breakfast-time. And Bardie did enjoy them so.</p>
			<p>The more I dwelled with that little child, the more I grew wrapped up in her. Her nature was so odd and loving, and her ways so pretty. Many men forego their goodness, so that they forget the nature of a little darling child. Otherwise, perhaps, we might not, if we kept our hearts aright, so despise the days of loving, and the time of holiness. Now this baby almost shamed me, and I might say Bunny too, when, having undressed her, and put the coarse rough nightgown on her, which came from Sker with the funerals, my grandchild called me from upstairs, to meet some great emergency.</p>
			<p>“Granny, come up with the stick dreckly moment, granny dear! Missy ’ont go into bed. Such a bad wicked child she is.”</p>
			<p>I ran upstairs, and there was Bunny all on fire with noble wrath, and there stood Bardie sadly scraping the worm-eaten floor with her small white toes.</p>
			<p>“I’se not a yicked shild,” she said, “I’se a yae good gal, I is; I ’ont go to bed till I say my payers to ’Mighty God, as my dear mama make me. She be very angy with ’a, Bunny, ’hen she knows it.”</p>
			<p>Hereupon I gave Bunny a nice little smack, and had a great mind to let her taste the stick which she had invoked so eagerly. However, she roared enough without it, because her feelings were deeply hurt. Bardie also cried for company, or, perhaps, at my serious aspect, until I put her down on her knees and bade her say her prayers, and have done with it. At the same time it struck me how stupid I was not to have asked about this before, inasmuch as even a child’s religion may reveal some of its history.</p>
			<p>She knelt as prettily as could be, with her head thrown back, and her tiny palms laid together upon her breast, and thus she said her simple prayer.</p>
			<p>“Pay God bless dear papa, and mama, and ickle bother. Gentle Jesus, meek and mild, ’ook upon a ickle shild, and make me a good gal. Amen.”</p>
			<p>Then she got up and kissed poor Bunny, and was put into bed as good as gold, and slept like a little dormouse till morning.</p>
			<p>Take it altogether now, we had a happy time of it. Every woman in Newton praised me for my kindness to the child; and even the men who had too many could not stand against Bardie’s smile. They made up, indeed, some scandalous story, as might have been expected, about my relationship to the baby, and her sudden appearance so shortly after my poor wife’s death. However, by knocking three men down, I produced a more active growth of charity in our neighbourhood.</p>
			<p>And very soon a thing came to pass, such as I never could have expected, and of a nature to lift me (even more than the free use of my pole) for a period of at least six months, above the reach of libel, from anyone below the rank of a justice of the peace. This happened just as follows:⁠—One night the children were snug in bed, and finding the evenings long, because the days were shortening in so fast⁠—which seemed to astonish everybody⁠—it came into my head to go no more than outside my own door, and into the “Jolly Sailors.” For the autumn seemed to be coming on, and I like to express my opinions upon that point in society; never being sure where I may be before ever another autumn. Moreover, the landlord was not a man to be neglected with impunity. He never liked his customers to stay too long away from him, any more than our parson did; and pleasant as he was when pleased, and generous in the way of credit to people with any furniture, nothing was more sure to vex him, than for a man without excuse, to pretend to get on without him.</p>
			<p>Now when I came into the room, where our little sober proceedings are⁠—a narrow room, and dark enough, yet full of much good feeling, also with hard wooden chairs worn soft by generations of sitting⁠—a sudden stir arose among the excellent people present. They turned and looked at me, as if they had never enjoyed that privilege, or, at any rate, had failed to make proper use of it before. And ere my modesty was certain whether this were for good or harm, they raised such a clapping with hands and feet, and a clinking of glasses in a line with it, that I felt myself worthy of some great renown. I stood there and bowed, and made my best leg, and took off my hat in acknowledgment. Observing this, they were all delighted, as if I had done them a real honour; and up they arose with one accord, and gave me three cheers, with an Englishman setting the proper tune for it.</p>
			<p>I found myself so overcome all at once with my own fame and celebrity, that I called for a glass of hot rum-and-water, with the nipple of a lemon in it, and sugar the size of a nutmeg. My order was taken with a speed and deference hitherto quite unknown to me; and better than that, seven men opened purses, and challenged the right to pay for it. Entering into so rare a chance of getting on quite gratis, and knowing that such views are quick to depart, I called for six <abbr>oz.</abbr> of tobacco, with the Bristol stamp (a red crown) upon it. Scarce had I tested the draught of a pipe⁠—which I had to do sometimes for half an hour, with all to blow out, and no drawing in⁠—when the tobacco was at my elbow, served with a saucer, and a curtsey. “Well,” thought I, “this is real glory.” And I longed to know how I had earned it.</p>
			<p>It was not likely, with all those people gazing so respectfully, that I would deign to ask them coarsely, what the deuce could have made them do it. I had always felt myself unworthy of obscure position, and had dreamed, for many years, of having my merits perceived at last. And to ask the reason would have been indeed a degradation, although there was not a fibre of me but quivered to know all about it. Herein, however, I overshot the mark, as I found out afterwards; for my careless manner made people say that I must have written the whole myself⁠—a thing so very far below me, that I scorn to answer it. But here it is; and then you can judge from the coarse style, and the three-decked words, whether it be work of mine.</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Felix Farley’s Bristol Journal</i>, Saturday, <time datetime="1782-07-24">July 24, 1782</time>.⁠—<b>Shipwreck and loss of all hands</b>⁠—<b>Heroism of a British tar</b>.⁠—We hear of a sad catastrophe from the coast of Glamorganshire. The season of great heat and drought, from which our readers must have suffered, broke up, as they may kindly remember, with an almost unprecedented gale of wind and thunder, on Sunday, the 11th day of this month. In the height of the tempest a large ship was descried, cast by the fury of the elements upon a notorious reef of rocks, at a little place called Sker, about twenty miles to the east of Swansea. Serious apprehensions were entertained by the spectators for the safety of the crew, which appeared to consist of black men. Their fears were too truly verified, for in less than an hour the ill-fated bark succumbed to her cruel adversaries. No adult male of either colour appears to have reached the shore alive, although a celebrated fisherman, and heroic pensioner of our royal navy, whose name is David Llewellyn, and who traces his lineage from the royal bard of that patronymic, performed prodigies of valour, and proved himself utterly regardless of his own respectable and blameless life, by plunging repeatedly into the boiling surges, and battling with the raging elements, in the vain hope of extricating the sufferers from a watery grave. With the modesty which appears to be, under some inscrutable law of nature, inseparable from courage of the highest order, this heroic tar desires to remain in obscurity. This we could not reconcile with our sense of duty; and if any lover of our black brethren finds himself moved by this narration, we shall be happy to take charge of any remittance marked “<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">D. L.</abbr>” It grieves us to add that none escaped except an intelligent young female, who clung to the neck of Llewellyn. She states that the ship was the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Andalusia</i>, and had sailed from Appledore, which is, we believe, in Devonshire. The respected Coroner Bowles held an inquest, which afforded universal satisfaction.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Deeply surprised as I was to find how accurately, upon the whole, this paper had got the story of it⁠—for not much less than half was true⁠—it was at first a puzzle to me how they could have learned so much about myself, and the valiant manner in which I intended to behave, but found no opportunity. Until I remembered that a man, possessing a very bad hat, had requested the honour of introducing himself to me, in my own house, and had begged me by all means to consider myself at home, and to allow him to send for refreshment, which I would not hear of twice, but gave him what I thought up to his mark, according to manners and appearance. And very likely he made a mistake between my description of what I was ready, as well as desirous, to carry out, and what I bodily did go through, ay, and more, to the back of it. However, I liked this account very much, and resolved to encourage yet more warmly the next man who came to me with a bad hat. What, then, was my disgust at perceiving, at the very foot of that fine description, a tissue of stuff like the following!</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p><b>Another account</b> [from a highly-esteemed correspondent].⁠—The great invasion of sand, which has for so many generations spread such wide devastation, and occasioned such grievous loss to landowners on the western coast of Glamorganshire, made another great stride in the storm of Sabbath-day, July 11. A vessel of considerable burden, named the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Andalusia</i>, and laden with negroes, most carefully shipped for conversion among the good merchants of Bristol, appears to have been swallowed up by the sand; and our black fellow-creatures disappeared. It is to be feared, from this visitation of an ever-benign Providence, that few of them had been converted, and that the burden of their sins disabled them from swimming. If one had been snatched as a brand from the burning, gladly would we have recorded it, and sent him forward prayerfully for sustenance on his way to the Lord. But the only eyewitness (whose word must never be relied upon when mammon enters into the conflict), a worn-out but well-meaning sailor, who fattens upon the revenue of an overburdened country⁠—this man ran away so fast that he saw hardly anything. The Lord, however, knoweth His own in the days of visitation. A little child came ashore alive, and a dead child bearing a coronet. Many people have supposed that the pusillanimous sailor aforesaid knows much more than he will tell. It is not for us to enter into that part of the question. Duty, however, compels us to say, that anyone desiring to have a proper comprehension of this heavy but righteous judgment⁠—for He doeth all things well⁠—cannot do better than apply to the well-known horologist of Bridgend, Hezekiah Perkins, also to the royal family.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The above yarn may simply be described as a gallow’s-rope spun by Jack Ketch himself from all the lies of all the scoundrels he has ever hanged, added to all that his own vile heart can invent, with the devil to help him. The cold-blooded, creeping, and crawling manner in which I myself was alluded to⁠—although without the manliness even to set my name down⁠—as well as the low hypocrisy of the loathsome white-livered syntax of it, made me⁠—well, I will say no more⁠—the filthiness reeks without my stirring, and, indeed, no honest man should touch it; only, if Hezekiah Perkins had chanced to sneak into the room just then, his wife might have prophesied shrouds and weeds.</p>
			<p>For who else was capable of such lies, slimed with so much sanctimony, like cellar slugs, or bilge-hole rats, rolling in Angelica, while all their entrails are of brimstone, such as Satan would scorn to vomit? A bitter pain went up my right arm, for the weakness of my heart, when that miscreant gave me insult, and I never knocked him down the well. And over and over again I have found it a thorough mistake to be always forgiving. However, to have done with reflections which must suggest themselves to anyone situated like me⁠—if, indeed, anyone ever was⁠—after containing myself, on account of the people who surrounded me, better than could have been hoped for, I spoke, because they expected it.</p>
			<p>“Truly, my dear friends, I am thankful for your goodwill towards me. Also to the unknown writer, who has certainly made too much of my poor unaided efforts. I did my best; it was but little: and who dreams of being praised for it? Again, I am thankful to this other writer, who has overlooked me altogether. For the sake of poor Sandy Macraw, we must thank him that he kindly forbore to make public the name.”</p>
			<p>You should have seen the faces of all the folk around the table when I gave them this surprise.</p>
			<p>“Why,” said one, “we thought for sure that it was you he was meaning, Dyo dear. And in our hearts we were angry to him, for such falsehoods large and black. Indeed and indeed, true enough it may be of a man outlandish such as Sandy Macraw is.”</p>
			<p>“Let us not hasten to judge,” I replied; “Sandy is brave enough, I daresay, and he can take his own part well. I will not believe that he ran away; very likely he never was there at all. If he was, he deserves high praise for taking some little care of himself. I should not have been so stiff this night, if I had only had the common sense to follow his example.”</p>
			<p>All our people began to rejoice; and yet they required, as all of us do, something more than strongest proof.</p>
			<p>“What reason is to show then, Dyo, that this man of letters meant not you, but Sandy Macraw, to run away so?”</p>
			<p>“Hopkin, read it aloud,” I said; “neither do I know, nor care, what the writer’s meaning was. Only I thought there was something spoken about his Majesty’s revenue. Is it I, or is it Sandy, that belongs to the revenue?”</p>
			<p>This entirely settled it. All our people took it up, and neglected not to tell one another. So that in less than three days’ time, my name was spread far and wide for the praise, and the Scotchman’s for the condemnation. I desired it not, as my friends well knew; but what use to beat to windward, against the breath of the whole of the world? Therefore I was not so obstinate as to set my opinion against the rest; but left it to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Macraw to rebut, if he could, his pusillanimity.</p>
			<p>As for Hezekiah Perkins, all his low creations fell upon the head from which they sprang. I spoke to our rector about his endeavour to harm a respectable Newton man⁠—for you might call Macraw that by comparison, though he lived at Porthcawl, and was not respectable⁠—and everybody was struck with my kindness in using such handsome terms of a rival. The result was that Perkins lost our church-clock, which paid him as well as a many two others, having been presented to the parish, and therefore not likely to go without pushing. For our rector was a peppery man, except when in the pulpit, and what he said to Hezekiah was exactly this.</p>
			<p>“What, Perkins! another great bill again! ‘To repair of church-clock, seven-and-sixpence; to ten miles’ travelling, at threepence per mile,’⁠—and so on, and so on! Why, you never came further than my brother the Colonel’s, the last three times you have charged for. Allow me to ask you a little question: to whom did you go for the keys of the church?”</p>
			<p>“As if I should want any keys of the church! There is no church-lock in the county that I cannot open, as soon as whistle.”</p>
			<p>“Indeed! So you pick our lock. Do you ever open a church-door honestly, for the purpose of worshipping the Lord? I have kept my eye upon you, sir, because I hear that you have been reviling my parishioners. And I happen to know that you never either opened the lock of our church or picked it, for the last three times you have charged for. But one thing you have picked for many years, and that is the pocket of my ratepayers. Be off, sir⁠—be off with your trumpery bill! We will have a good churchman to do our clock⁠—a thoroughly honest seaman, and a regular churchgoer.”</p>
			<p>“Do you mean that big thief, Davy Llewellyn? Well, well, do as you please. But I will thank you to pay my bill first.”</p>
			<p>“Thank me when you get it, sir. You may fall down on your canting knees, and thank the Lord for one thing.”</p>
			<p>“What am I to thank the Lord for? For allowing you to cheat me thus?”</p>
			<p>“For giving me self-command enough not to knock you down, sir.” With that the rector came so nigh him, that brother Perkins withdrew in haste; for the parson had done that sort of thing to people who ill-used him; and the sense of the parish was always with him. Hence the management of the church-clock passed entirely into my hands, and I kept it almost always going, at less than half Hezekiah’s price; and this reunited me to the Church (from which my poor wife perhaps had led me astray some little), by a monthly arrangement which reflected equal credit on either party.</p>
			<p>And even this was not the whole of the blessings that now rolled down upon me, for the sake, no doubt, of little Bardie, as with the ark in the Bible. For this fine Felix Farley was the only great author of news at that time prevalent among us. It is true that there was another journal nearer to us, at Hereford, and a highly good one, but for a very clear reason it failed to have command of the public-houses. For the customers liked both their pipes and their papers to be of the same origin, and go together kindly. And Hereford sent out no tobacco; while Bristol was more famous for the best Virginian birdseye, than even for rum, or intelligence.</p>
			<p>Therefore, as everybody gifted with the gift of reading came to the public-houses gradually, and to compare interpretation over those two narratives, both of which stirred our county up, my humble name was in their mouths as freely and approvingly as the sealing-wax end of their pipe stems. Unanimous consent accrued (when all had said the same thing over, fifty times in different manners, and with fine-drawn argument) that after all, and upon the whole, David Llewellyn was an honour to county and to country.</p>
			<p>After that, for at least a fortnight, no more dogs were set at me. When I showed myself over a gentleman’s gate, in the hope of selling fish to him, it used to be always, “At him, Pincher!” “Into his legs, Growler, boy!” so that I was compelled to carry my conger-rod to save me. Now, however, and for a season till my fame grew stale, I never lifted the latch of a gate without hearing grateful utterance, “Towser, down, you son of a gun! Yelp and Vick, hold your stupid tongues, will you?” The value of my legs was largely understood by gentlemen. As for the ladies and the housemaids, if conceit were in my nature, what a run it would have had! Always and always the same am I, and above even women’s opinions. But I know no other man whose head would not have been turned with a day of it. For my rap at the door was scarcely given (louder, perhaps, than it used to be) before every maid in the house was out, and the lady looking through the blinds. I used to dance on the step, and beat my arms on my breast, with my basket down between my legs, and tremble almost for a second rap; and then it was, “Like your imperence!” “None of your stinking stuff!” and so on. But now they ran down beautifully, and looked up under their eyelids at me, and left me to show them what I liked, and never beat down a halfpenny, and even accepted my own weight. Such is the grand effect of glory; and I might have kissed every one of them, and many even of the good plain cooks, if I could have reconciled it with my sense of greatness.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
