<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LXVII: Dog Eats Dog</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-67" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Dog Eats Dog</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>To a man, whose time of life begins to be a subject of some consideration to him, when the few years still in hope can be counted on a hand, and may not need a finger; and with the tide of this world ebbing to the inevitable sea⁠—to him there is scarcely any sweet and gentle pastime more delightful than to sit on a bank of ancient moss, beside a tidal river, and watch the decreasing waters, and prove his own eternity by casting a pebble into them.</p>
			<p>Hence it was that Sir Philip Bampfylde, on the very morning after I gave him back his grandchild, sat gazing into the ebb of the Tawe, some fifty yards below the spot, whence Jack Wildman’s father carried off so wickedly that helpless pair of children. Here it was my privilege to come up to Sir Philip, and spread before him my humble reasons for having preferred the kitchen last night to the dining-room and the drawing-room. It was consistent with my nature; and he, though wishing otherwise, agreed not to be offended.</p>
			<p>Then I asked him how the young lady (whose health every one of us had honoured, all over the kitchen-table) had contrived to pass the night, and whether she had seen her father yet. He said she had slept pretty well considering, but that as concerned her father, they had not thought it wise to let her see him, until the doctor came. There was no telling how it might act upon Squire Philip’s constitution, after so many years of misery, cobwebs, and desolation. For Providence had not gifted him with a mind so strong as his father’s was, and the sudden break in on the death of the mind has been known, in such a case, to lead to bodily decease. But few things vexed the General more than that wretched lie of Chowne’s, and slander upon a loyal family while in service of the Crown. What Captain Drake had landed from the boat was not an arm-chest, but a chest of plate and linen, belonging to his brother, which he would no longer borrow, while the Squire so cruelly dealt with him.</p>
			<p>Then I asked Sir Philip whether the ancient builder over at Appledore had been sent for to depose to the boat; for we had brought that little craft on the top of our coach from Ilfracombe. The General said that I might see him even now examining her, if I would only take the trouble to look round the corner; but he himself was so well convinced, without any further testimony, that he did not even care to hear what the old man had to say of it, any more than he cared for the jemmyset. This, however, is not my manner of regarding questions. Not from any private fountains of conviction, and so on, but out of the mouths of many witnesses shall a thing be established. Therefore I hastened round the corner, to sift this ancient boatwright.</p>
			<p>As surly a fellow as ever lived, and from his repugnance to my uniform, one who had made more money, I doubt, by the smuggler’s keg than the shipwright’s adze. Entering into his nature at sight, I took the upper hand of him, as my rank insisted on.</p>
			<p>“Hark ye now, master ship-carpenter, where was this little craft put together, according to your opinion?”</p>
			<p>Either this fellow was deaf as a post, or else he meant to insult me, for he took no more notice of me than he did of the pigs that were snuffling at beechnuts down by the side of the landing-place. I am not the right man to put up with insolence; therefore I screwed my hammerhead into the socket below my muscles, and therewith dealt him a tap on his hat, just to show what might come afterwards.</p>
			<p>Receiving this administration, and seeing that more was very likely from the same source to be available, what did this rogue do but endeavour to show the best side of his manners. Wherefore, to let him have his say, here is his opinion.</p>
			<p>“This here boat be the same as I built, year as my wife were took with quinzy, and were called home by the Lord. I built her for <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.boat">Wild-duck</i> of Appledore, a little dandy-rigged craft as used to be hired by Cap’en Bampfylde. To this here boat I can swear, although some big rogue have been at work, painting her, as knew not how to paint; and a lubber, no doubt, every now and then patching her up, or repairing of her. The name in her stern have been painted up from ‘<i epub:type="se:name.vessel.boat">Wild-duck</i>, Appledore,’ into ‘<i epub:type="se:name.vessel.boat">Santa Lucia</i>, Salvador;’ three or four letters are my own, the rest are the work of some pirate. She be no more foreign-build than I be. But a sailor accustomed to foreign parts would be sure to reckon so, reason why I served my time with a builder over to Port-au-Prince. And I should like to see the man anywhere round these here parts, as can tuck in the bends as I does.”</p>
			<p>Leaving this conceited fellow to his narrow unpleasantness, I turned my head, and there beheld Captain Bluett harkening.</p>
			<p>“Come,” he cried out, in his hearty manner, “what a cook’s boiling of fools we are! Here we are chewing a long-chewed quid, while the devil that brewed this gale of wind may fly far away, and grin at us. Llewellyn, do you mean to allow⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Hush,” I said softly, for that low shipwright showed his eyes coming up under his cap. And I saw that he was that particular villain, after his scurrilous words about me, who would sell his soul to that wretch of a Chowne for half-a-crown a-week almost. Therefore I led our young Captain Bluett well away out of this fellow’s hearing.</p>
			<p>“Davy,” said he, “we all know your courage, your readiness, and your resources. Still you appear to be under a spell⁠—and you know you are superstitious about this cunning and cowardly blackguard, who frightens the whole of this country, as he never could frighten Glamorganshire.”</p>
			<p>“I have no fear of him, sir,” I said; “I will go with you to confront him.”</p>
			<p>“Why, your teeth are ready to chatter, Llewellyn; and your lips are blue! You who stood like a milestone, they tell me, at the helm of the Goliath, or like a clock going steadily tick, before we fired a shot, and with both shell and shot through your grey whiskers⁠—”</p>
			<p>“But, Captain, a minister of the Lord⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Master, a minister of the devil⁠—once for all, today I go to horsewhip him, if he is young enough; or to pull his nose if he is old enough, and Old Harry be with him in choice of the two? Zounds, sir, is it a thing to laugh at?”</p>
			<p>Rodney Bluett was well known to everyone who served under him for the mildness of his language, and the want of oaths he had; and so, of course, for his self-control, and the power of his heart when it did break forth. Everybody loved him because he never cursed anyone at a venture, and kept himself very close to facts, however hard driven by circumstances; so that I was now amazed to hear this young man spoil my pipe with violent emotions.</p>
			<p>“Have you consulted Sir Philip?” I asked. “It is his place to take up the question.”</p>
			<p>“What question? There is no question. The thing is proved. My duty is plain. Sir Philip is too old to see to it. The Squire is a spooney. The Commodore is not here yet. I have spoken to his wife, who is a very sweet and wise lady; and she agrees with me that it will save the family a world of scandal; and perhaps failure of the law, for me to take the law into my own hands, and thrash this blackguard within an inch of his life.”</p>
			<p>“To be sure, and save her husband from the risk of tackling a desperate man. It is most wise on her part. But I beg you, my dear sir, for the sake of your dear uncle and your good mother, keep clear of this quarrel. You know not the man you have to deal with. Even if you can thrash him, which is no easy business, he will shoot you afterwards. He is the deadest shot in the county.”</p>
			<p>“Hurrah!” cried Rodney, tossing up his hat; “that entirely settles it. Come along, old fellow, and show us the way: and not a word to anyone.”</p>
			<p>Now this may seem a very mad resolve for a man of my sense to give into. But whether I turned myself this way or that, I could see no chance of bettering it. If I refused to go, young Rodney (as I could see by the set of his mouth) would go alone, and perhaps get killed, and then how could any of the family ever look at me again? On the other hand, if I should go to the Colonel, or to the General, for opinion, and to beg them to stop it, my interference⁠—nine chances to one⁠—would only end in giving offence among the superior orders. Add to this my real desire to square it out with Chowne himself, after all his persecution, and you may be able to forgive me for getting upon horseback, after many years of forbearance, and with my sugar-nippers screwed on, to lay hold by the forestay, if she should make bad weather. Also, I felt it my duty to take a double-barrelled pistol, heavily loaded and well primed.</p>
			<p>Captain Rodney forged ahead so on a real hunting-craft, that my dappled grey, being warranted not to lurch me overboard, could not keep in line whatever sail I made upon her. My chief rule in life is not to hurry. What good ever comes of it? People only abuse you, and your breath is too short to answer them. Moreover, I felt an uneasy creaking in my bends from dousing forward, and then easing backward, as a man must do who knows how to ride. The Captain was wroth with me, out of all reason; but as he could not find the way to Nympton Moors without me, I was enabled to take my leisure, having the surety of overgetting him when the next crossroad came. Therefore it was late afternoon when we turned into the black fir-grove which led up to the house of Chowne, and Rodney Bluett clutched the big whip in his hand severely. For we had asked at the little inn of which I spoke a long time ago, whether the Parson was now at home.</p>
			<p>“Ay, that ’un be,” said the man with a grin, for we did not see the landlady; “but ye best way not to go nigh ’un.”</p>
			<p>Already I seemed not to feel as I hoped, in the earlier stage of the journey. My thoughts had been very upright for a while, and spirited, and delighted; but now I began to look at things from a different point of view almost. It is not man’s business to worry his head about righting of wrongs in this world, unless they are done to himself; and if so, revenge is its name, and an ugly one. Long life leads one to forgive, when to carry it on would be troublesome.</p>
			<p>Through the drip of dying leaves, the chill of dull November now began to darken over us as we turned the corner of Chowne’s own road, and faced his lonely mansion. The house had a heavy and sullen look, according to my ideas, not receiving light and pleasure of the sun when possible. Heavy fir-trees overhung it, never parting with their weight; and the sunset (when there was any) could not pierce the holm-oaks.</p>
			<p>“What a gloomy and devilish place!” cried Rodney Bluett, beginning to tremble from some unknown influence. “Upon my soul, if I lived here, I should be hatching plots myself. Or is it the nature of the man that has made the place so horrible?”</p>
			<p>“Let us go back,” said I; “come back, my good sir, I conjure you. Such a man should be left to God, to punish in His own good time.”</p>
			<p>“Hark!” cried Rodney, pulling up, and listening through the gloomy wood; “that was a woman’s scream, I am sure. Is he murdering some more little ones?”</p>
			<p>We listened, and heard a loud piercing shriek, that made our hair stand on end almost, so mad was it, and so unearthly; and then two more of yet wilder agony; and after that a long low wailing.</p>
			<p>“On, on!” cried Rodney Bluett; “you know these paths, gallop on, Davy.”</p>
			<p>“You go first,” I answered; “your horse is fresher; I am coming⁠—to be sure I am⁠—do you think I am frightened?”</p>
			<p>“Well, I don’t know,” he replied; “but I am not ashamed to own that I am.”</p>
			<p>Clapping spurs to his horse, he dashed on; and thoroughly miserable as I felt, there was nothing for me but to follow him.</p>
			<p>In the name of the Lord, what a sight we came on, where the drive sweeps round at the corner of the house! Under a dark tree of some sort, and on a garden bench, we discovered the figures of two women. Or rather, one sat on the bench; the other lay stretched on the ground, with her head cast recklessly back on the ledge, her hair spread in masses over it, and both hands pressed on her eyes and ears, to shut out sight and hearing. Her lips were open, and through her white teeth came wails of anguish, that would have been shrieks, if nature had not failed her.</p>
			<p>But the elder woman sat upright, in scorn of all such weakness, with her gaunt figure drawn like a cable taut, no sign of a tear on her shrunken cheeks, and the whole of her face as numb and cold as an iced figurehead in the Arctic seas. Yet no one, with knowledge of the human race, could doubt which of these two suffered most.</p>
			<p>We reined up our horses, and gazed in terror, for neither of them noticed us; and then we heard, from inside the house, sounds that made our flesh creep. Barking, howling, snapping of teeth, baying as of a human bloodhound, frothy splutterings of fury, and then smothered yelling.</p>
			<p>“Her have a gat ’un now,” cried a clown, running round the end of the house, as if he were enjoying it. “Reckon our passon wun’t baite much moore, after Passon Jack be atop of ’un.”</p>
			<p>“Oh sir, oh sir, oh for God’s sake, sir,” cried the poor lady who had lain on the ground, rushing up to us, and kneeling, and trying to get hold of us; “you must have come to stop it, sir. Only one hour⁠—allow him one hour, dear, dear sirs, for repentance. He has not been a good man, I know, but I am his own wife, good kind sirs⁠—and if he could only have a little time, if it were only half an hour⁠—he might, he might⁠—”</p>
			<p>Here a sound of throttling came through a broken windowpane, and down she fell insensible.</p>
			<p>“What does it mean?” cried Rodney Bluett; “is it murder, madness, or suicide? Follow me, Davy. Here I go, anyhow, into the thick of it.”</p>
			<p>He dashed through the window; and I with more caution, cocking my pistol, followed him, while I heard the clown shouting after us⁠—</p>
			<p>“Danged vules both of ’e. Bide outside, bide outside, I tell ’e.”</p>
			<p>Oh that we had remained outside! I have been through a great deal of horrible sights, enough to harden any man, and cure him of womanly squeamishness. Yet never did I behold, or dream of, anything so awful as the scene that lay before me. People were longing to look at it now, but none (save ourselves) durst enter.</p>
			<p>It was Chowne’s own dining-room, all in the dark, except where a lamp had been brought in by a trembling footman, who ran away, knowing that he brought this light for his master to be strangled by. And in the corner now lay his master, smothered under a featherbed; yet with his vicious head fetched out in the last rabid struggle to bite. There was the black hair, black face, and black tongue, shown by the frothy wainscot, or between it and the ticking. On the featherbed lay exhausted, and with his mighty frame convulsed, so that a child might master him, Parson Jack Rambone, the strongest man, whose strength (like all other powers) had laid a horrible duty upon him. Sobbing with all his great heart he lay, yet afraid to take his weight off, and sweating at every pore with labour, peril of his life, and agony.</p>
			<p>“Oh Dick, Dick,” he said, quite softly, and between his pantings; “how many larks have we had together, and for me to have to do this to you! I am sure you knew me, before you died. I think you know me now, Dick. Oh, for God’s sake, shut your eyes! Darling Dick, are you dead, are you dead? You are the very cleverest fellow ever I came across of. You can do it, if you like. Oh, dear Dick, Dick, my boy, do shut your eyes!”</p>
			<p>We stood looking at them, with no power to go up to them; all experience failed us as to what was the proper thing to do, till I saw that Chowne’s face ought to have a napkin over it. None had been laid for dinner; but I knew where butlers keep them.</p>
			<p>When I had done this, Parson Jack (who could not escape from the great black eyes) arose, and said, “I thank you, sir.” He staggered so that we had to support him; but not a word could we say to him. “I am bitten in two places, if not more,” he rather gasped than said to us, as he laid bare his enormous arms. “I care not much. I will follow my friend. Or if the Lord should please to spare me, henceforth I am an altered man. And yet, for the sake of my family, will you heat the kitchen poker?”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
