<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>XX</h2>
				<h3>Confidential Intercourse</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>But everybody must be tired of all this trouble about that boat. It shows what a state of things we live in, and what a meddlesome lot we are, that a good man cannot receive a gift straight into his hands from Providence, which never before rewarded him, though he said his prayers every night almost, and did his very best to cheat nobody; it proves, at least to my mind, something very rotten somewhere, when a man of blameless character must prove his right to what he finds. However, I had proved my right, and cut in Colonel Lougher’s woods a larger pole than usual, because the law would guarantee me, if at all assaulted.</p>
			<p>And truly, after all my care to be on the right side of it, such a vile attack of law was now impending on me, that with all my study of it, and perpetual attempts to jam its helm up almost into the very eye of reason, my sails very nearly failed to draw, and left me shivering in the wind. But first for what comes foremost.</p>
			<p>At that particular moment all things seemed to be most satisfactory. Here was my property duly secured and most useful to me, here was a run of fish up from the Mumbles of a very superior character, here was my own reputation spread by the vigilance of the public press, so that I charged three farthings a-pound more than Sandy Mac did, and here was my cottage once more all alive with the mirth of our Bunny and Bardie. To see them playing at hide-and-seek with two chairs and a table; or “French and English,” which I taught them; or “come and visit my grandmother;” or making a cat of the kettle-holder, with a pair of ears and a tail to it; or giving a noble dinner-party with cockles and oyster-shells, and buttons, and apple-peel chopped finely; or, what was even a grander thing, eating their own dinners prettily, with their dolls beside them⁠—scarcely any one would have believed that these little ones had no mothers.</p>
			<p>And yet they did not altogether seem to be forgetful, or to view the world as if there were no serious side to it. Very grave discourse was sometimes held between their bouts of play, and subjects of great depth and wonder introduced by doll’s clothes. For instance:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Hasn’t ’a got no mama, poor Bunny, to thread ’e needle?”</p>
			<p>“No, my dear,” I answered, for my grandchild looked stupid about it; “poor Bunny’s mother is gone to heaven.”</p>
			<p>“My mama not gone to heaven. My mama come demorrow-day. I’se almost tired of yaiting, old Davy, but she sure to come demorrow-day.”</p>
			<p>But as the brave little creature spoke, I saw that “the dust was in her eyes.” This was her own expression always, to escape the reproach of crying, when her lonely heart was working with its misty troubles, and sent the tears into her eyes, before the tongue could tell of them. “Demorrow-day, demorrow-day,” all her loss was to be recovered always on “demorrow-day.”</p>
			<p>Not even so much as a doll had been saved from the total wreck of her fortunes; and when I beheld her wistful eyes set one day upon Bunny’s doll⁠—although only fit for hospital, having one arm and one leg and no nose, besides her neck being broken⁠—I set to at once and sharpened my knife upon a piece of sandstone. Then I sought out a piece of abele, laid by from the figure-head of a wrecked Dutchman, and in earnest I fell to, and shaped such a carving of a doll as never was seen before or since. Of course the little pet came, and stood, and watched every chip as I sliced it along, with sighs of deep expectancy, and a laugh when I got to the tail of it; and of course she picked up every one, not only as neatest of the neat, but also accounting them sacred offsets of the mysterious doll unborn. I could not get her to go to bed; and it was as good as a guinea to me to see the dancing in her eyes, and the spring of her body returning.</p>
			<p>“ ’E can make a boofely doll, old Davy; but ’e doesn’t know the yay to dess a doll.”</p>
			<p>“You are quite wrong there,” said I, perceiving that I should go up, or down, according to my assertion; and it made her open her eyes to see me cut out, with about five snips, a pair of drawers quite good enough for any decent woman. And she went to bed hugging the doll in that state, and praying to have her improved to-morrow.</p>
			<p>At breakfast-time mother Jones dropped in, for she loved a good salt-herring, and to lay down the law for the day almost; as if I knew scarce anything. And I always let her have her talk, and listened to it gravely; and clever women, as a rule, should not be denied of this attention; for if they are, it sours them. While she was sucking the last of the tail, and telling me excellent scandal, my little lady marched in straight, having finished her breakfast long ago, and bearing her new doll pompously. The fly-away colour in her cheeks, which always made her beautiful, and the sparkle of her gleeful eyes, were come again with pleasure, and so was the lovely pink of her lips, and the proper aspect of her nose. Also she walked with such motherly rank, throwing her legs with a female jerk⁠—it is enough for me to say that any newly-married woman would have kissed her all round the room.</p>
			<p>Now, mother Jones, having ten fine children (five male and five female) going about with clothes up to their forks, need not have done what she did, I think, and made me so bashful in my own house. For no sooner did she see this doll, than she cried, “Oh, my!” and covered up her face. The little maid looked up at me in great wonder, as if I were leading her astray; and I felt so angry with Mrs. Jones, after all the things I had seen abroad, and even in English churches, that I would not trust myself to speak. However, to pay her out for that, I begged her to cure the mischief herself, which she could not well decline; and some of the green blind still remaining, Dolly became a most handsome sight, with a crackle in front and a sweeping behind, so that our clerk, a good natured man, was invited to christen her; and “Patty Green” was the name he gave: and Bunny’s doll was nobody. Such a baby-like thing might seem almost below my dignity, and that of all the rest of us; only this child had the power to lead us, as by a special enchantment, back to our own childhood. Moreover, it was needful for me to go through with this doll’s birth (still more so with her dress, of course, having her a female), because through her I learned a great deal more of Bardie’s history than ever our Bunny could extract.</p>
			<p>Everybody who has no patience with the ways of childhood, may be vexed, and must be vexed, with our shipwrecked maid for knowing many things, but not the right; but I think she was to blame, only for her innocence. In her tiny brain was moving some uncertain sense of wrong; whether done by herself, or to her, was beyond her infant groping. If she could have made her mind up, in its little milky shell, that the evil had befallen, without harm on her part, doubtless she had done her best to let us know the whole of it. Her best, of course, would be but little, looking at her age and so on; and perhaps from some harsh word or frown, stamped into the tender flux of infantile memory, a heavy dread both darkened and repressed much recollection. Hence, if one tried to examine her, in order to find out who she was, she would shake her head, and say, “No! sompfin;” as she always did when puzzled or unable to pronounce a word. The only chance of learning even any little things she knew, was to leave her to her own way, and not interrupt her conversation with wooden or crockery playmates. All of these she endowed with life, having such power of life herself, and she reckoned them up for good behaviour, or for bad, as the case might be. And often was I touched at heart, after a day of bitter fighting with a world that wronged me, by hearing her in baby-prattle tell her playthings of their unkindness to a little thing with none to love her.</p>
			<p>But when I had finished Patty’s face up to complete expression, with two black buttons for her eyes, and a cowry for her mouth, and a nose of coral, also a glorious head of hair of crinkled sea-weed growing out of a shell (toothed like an ivory comb almost), the ecstasy of the child was such, that I obtained, as well as deserved, some valuable information.</p>
			<p>“Patty Geen, ’e’s been aye good,” I heard her say in my window-place, one morning after breakfast; “and ’e is the most boofely doll ever seen, and I tell ’a sompfin; only ’e musn’t tell anybody, till my dear mama comes. Nat wasn’t ickle bother, Patty.”</p>
			<p>“How do you know, Miss?” Patty inquired by means of my voice in the distance, and a little art I had learned abroad of throwing it into corners.</p>
			<p>“I tell ’a, Patty, I tell ’a. I ’ouldn’t tell ’e nasty man, but I tell old Davy some day. Ickle bother not like nat at all. Ickle bother not so big enough, and only two ickle teeth in front, and his hair all gone ayay it is, but mama say soon come back again.”</p>
			<p>“And what is little brother’s name?” said Patty, in a whisper; “and what is your name and papa’s?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, ’e silly Patty Geen! As if ’e didn’t know I’se Bardie, ever since I was anytin. And papa, is papa, he is. Patty, I’se kite ashamed of ’a. ’E’s such a silly ickle fin!”</p>
			<p>“Well, I know I am not very clever, Miss. But tell me some more things you remember.”</p>
			<p>“I tell ’a, if ’e stop kiet. ‘I ’ish ’a many happy turns of the day, Miss Bardie. Many happy turns of the day to ’a!’ And poor Bardie get off her stool, and say what her dear papa tell. ‘Gentleyums and yadies, I’se aye much obiged to ’a.’ And then have boofely appledies, and carbies, and a ickle dop of good yiney-piney. Does ’e know ’hot that means, poor Patty?”</p>
			<p>“No, my dear; how should I know?”</p>
			<p>“ ’E mustn’t call me ‘my dear,’ I tell ’a. ’E must know ’a’s pace in yife. Why, ’e’s only a doll, Patty, and Bardie’s a young yady, and a ’streamly ’cocious gal I is, and the gentleyums all say so. Ickle bother can’t say nuffin, without me to sow him the yay of it. But Bardie say almost anyfin; anyfin, when I yikes to ty. Bardie say ‘Pomyoleanian dog!’ ”</p>
			<p>This cost her a long breath, and a great effort; but Patty expressed intense amazement at such power of diction, and begged to know something more about that extraordinary animal.</p>
			<p>“Pomyoleanian dog is yite, yite all over ’sept his collar, and his collar’s boo. And he’s got hair that long, Patty, ever so much longer than yours. And he yun yound and yound, he does. Oh, I do so yant my Pomyoleanian dog!”</p>
			<p>Patty waited for two great tears to run quietly down two little cheeks; and then she expressed some contempt of the dog, and a strong desire to hear some more about the happy turns of the day.</p>
			<p>“Don’t ’e be jealous, now, Patty, I tell ’a. ’E ickle yite dog can eat, but ’e can’t. And happy turns of the day is yen a geat big gal is two years old with a ickle bother. And he can’t say nuffin, ’cos he grow too strong enough, and ’e young yady must repy; and ayebody yooks at ’a, and yaffs, and put ’e gasses up, and say, ’Hot a ’cocious ickle fin!’ And my dear papa say, ’Hot a good gal!’ and mama come and tiss ’a all over a’most, and then ’e all have some more puddeny-pie!”</p>
			<p>Overcome with that last memory, she could go no further; and being unable to give her pies, I felt myself bound to abandon any more inquiries. For that child scarcely ever roared, so as to obtain relief; but seemed with a kind of self-control⁠—such as unlucky people form, however early in their lives⁠—to take her troubles inwardly, and to be full to the very lip of them, without the power of spilling. This, though a comfort to other people, is far worse for themselves, I fear. And I knew that she did love pastry rarely; for one day, after a fine pair of soles, I said to the two children, “Now, put your little hands together, and thank God for a good dinner.” Bunny did this in a grateful manner, but Bardie said, “No, I ’ont, old Davy; I’ll thank God when I gets puddeny-pie.”</p>
			<p>Upon the whole, I concluded thus, that the little creature was after all (and as might have been expected with any other child almost) too young, in the third year of her age, to maintain any clear ideas of place, or time, or names, or doings, or anything that might establish from her own words only, whence she came or who she was. However, I now knew quite enough, if the right people ever came to seek for her, to “ ’dentify” her, as she expressed it to that stupid Coroner.</p>
			<p>Moxy Thomas came to fetch her back to Sker, in a few days’ time. I was now resolved to keep her, and she resolved to stay with me⁠—and doubtless I had first right to her. But when I saw poor Moxy’s face, and called to mind her desolation, and when she kissed my fishy hand to let her have this comfort, after all the Lord had taken from her, I could not find it in my heart to stand to my own interest. It came across me too that Bardie scarcely throve on so much fish; and we never had any butcher’s meat, or meat of any kind at all, unless I took shares in a pig, after saving up money for Christmas, or contrived to defend myself against the hares that would run at me so, when I happened to come through a gate at night.</p>
			<p>So with a clearly-pronounced brave roar, having more music than Bunny’s in it, and enough to wash a great deal of “dust” out of her woefully lingering eyes, away she went in Moxy’s arms, with Patty Green in her own looking likely to get wet through. And Bunny stuck her thumbs into my legs, which she had a knack of doing, especially after sucking them; so thus we stood, at our cottage door, looking after Bardie; and I took off my hat, and she spread her hand out, in the intervals of woe; and little thought either of us, I daresay, of the many troubles in store for us both.</p>
			<p>Only before that grievous parting, she had done a little thing which certainly did amaze me. And if anybody knows the like, I shall be glad to hear of it. I had a snug and tidy locker very near the fireplace, wherein I kept some little trifles; such as Bunny had an eye for, but was gradually broken into distant admiration. One morning I came suddenly in from looking to my night-lines, and a pretty scene I saw. The door of my cupboard was wide open, and there stood little Bardie giving a finishing lick to her fingers. Bunny also in the corner, with her black eyes staring, as if at the end of the world itself. However, her pinafore was full.</p>
			<p>No sooner did my grandchild see me, than she rushed away with shrieks, casting down all stolen goods in agony of conscience. I expected Bardie to do the same; but to my great wonderment up she walked and faced me.</p>
			<p>“Must I beat poor Patty Geen?” The tears were in her eyes at having to propose so sad a thing. And she stroked the doll, to comfort her.</p>
			<p>“Beat poor Patty!” said I, in amazement. “Why, what harm has Patty done?”</p>
			<p>“Nare she have been, all ’e time, stealing ’a soogar, old Davy!” And she looked at me as if she had done a good turn by the information. I scarcely knew what to do, I declare; for her doll was so truly alive to her, that she might and perhaps did believe it. However, I shut her in my little bedroom, until her heart was almost broken; and then I tried to reason with her, on the subject of telling lies; but she could not understand what they were; until I said what I was forced to do, when I went among bad people.</p>
			<p>That evening, after she was gone, and while I was very dull about it, finding poor Bunny so slow and stupid, and nothing to keep me wide awake⁠—there I was bound to be wide awake, more than at Petty Sessions even, when mine enemies throng against me. For almost before I had smoked two pipes, or made up my mind what to do with myself, finding a hollow inside of me, the great posting-coach from Bridgend came up, with the sun setting bright on its varnish, and at my very door it stopped. Next to the driver sat a constable who was always unjust to me; and from the inside came out first Justice Anthony Stew of Pen Coed, as odious and as meddlesome a justice of the peace as ever signed a warrant; and after him came a tall elderly gentleman, on whom I had never set eyes before, but I felt that he must be a magistrate.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
